Release doc (#3957)
cloud-hypervisor/cloud-hypervisor: docs/releases.md

# Release Documentation

## Abstract

> In order to provide a generic guidance to users, downstream maintainers and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document provides guidance to users, downstream maintainers and
```

Reviewer 2: This isn't fixed.

any other consumers of the Cloud Hypervisor project, this document
describes the release process, release cadence, stability expectations and
related topics.

## Basic Terms

### Stability

> In the context of Cloud Hypervisor, the points of reference regarding stability
> are as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Cloud Hypervisor the following areas are subject to stability guarantees:
```

- [REST API](api.md#rest-api)
- [Command line options](api.md#command-line-interface)
- [Device Model](device_model.md)

> - Device tree, device list, ACPI, Hyper-V enlightenments, UEFI and any other

Reviewer: This is not relevant. Cloud Hypervisor has nothing to do with UEFI.

  features exposed to guest
- KVM compatibility
- Rust edition compatibility

This list is incomplete but this document serves as a best effort guide to stability
across releases.

### Experimental features

> Features that are being actively developed and are possibly incomplete or known to be
> unstable are considered experimental. These features are in no case recommended for
> use in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Experimental features are under active development and no guarantees are made about their stability.
```

> Features currently considered experimental:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of experimental features:
```

- TDX
- vfio-user
- vDPA

### Security

> Security issues usually involve only defects directly related to Cloud Hypervisor.

Reviewer: This is not true. If a dependency has an issue a new Cloud Hypervisor release needs to be made since all dependencies are statically linked (except libc)

Author: Yep, I'm only underlining that "security issue in dependency" != "security issue in cloud hypervisor itself". Also a security issue in a dependency, that doesn't affect CH itself, won't require a new release.  

Thanks

Author: OK, moved this out as well. The intention here was actually same - to answer some question beforehand. Perhaps there's no need to expose this kind of detail level anyway. 

Thanks

While security issues in the compiler or third party components are out of scope as
they can't be influenced by the Cloud Hypervisor project, still fixes to affected
code or changes to ensure a non vulnerable dependency version is used might trigger
a new point release. However, these measures won't affect possibly already released
tarballs or binary artifacts.

> A new CVE needs to be requested for the serucity flaw documentation. Multiple related
> security issues can be involved in the same CVE.
> 
> A way to reproduce a security issue might not be made public.
> 
> Any downstream projects including or packaging Cloud Hypervisor (for example Linux
> distributions) should ideally have a way to be notified on the security issue prior
> the release. Security issuse are to be explicitly mentioned as such in the release
> notes including the CVE if available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For security issues an advisory will be published via the GitHub security advisory process along with the release. Watching the project on GitHub will notify you of those issues.
```

## Releases

### Versioning

> The versioning scheme uses `MAJOR.POINT` as pattern, this means:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The versioning scheme uses `MAJOR.POINT` pattern:
```

> - `MAJOR` can introduce incompatible changes. Changes to the [API](api.md#rest-api),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `MAJOR` can introduce incompatible changes along with support for new features. Changes to the [API](api.md#rest-api),
```

  [CLI options](api.md#command-line-interface) and [device model](device_model.md)

>   require a premonition at least 2 releases in advance for the actual change to take

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  require a notice at least 2 releases in advance for the actual change to take
```

  place.

> - `POINT` can contain bug and security fixes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `POINT` contains bug fixes and/or security fixes.
```

### Major Release Cadence

Cloud Hypervisor is under active development. A new major release is issued approximately

> every 6 weeks. Point releases are issued on demand, when important bugfixes are in

Reviewer: nit: "bug fixes"

Author: Fixed, thanks.

> the queue. A major release would receive bugfixes for the next two cycles (~12 weeks)

Reviewer: nit: ditto

Author: Fixed, thanks.

and then be considered EOL.

```

> ++++ Active release support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ - Active release support
```

E - EOL

        2021                2022                2023 
         |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 
18.0     |    |    |  ++++++++E
19.0     |    |    |    |++++++++E
20.0     |    |    |    |   ++++++++E
21.0     |    |    |    |    | ++++++++E
22.0     |    |    |    |    |    +++++++++E
23.0     |    |    |    |    |    |  +++++++++E

```

### Major Release Stability Considerations

Snapshot/restore support is not compatible across `MAJOR` versions.
Live migration support is not compatible across `MAJOR` versions.

### LTS Release Cadence

> A new LTS release is promoted from a regular release every 12 months with the
> support timespan of 18 months. This way, there's always a 6 month overlap window 
> suitable for migration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A regular release is promoted to LTS every 12 months. An LTS release is supported for 18 months. This gives a 6 months window for users to move to the new LTS.
```

```

> ++++ Active release support

Reviewer 2: Ditto

Author: Fixed, thanks.

> 

Reviewer: nit: Extra whitespace

Author: Fixed, thanks.

Reviewer 2: This isn't fixed. I mean there's still an extra line at the top of the file.

# Release Documentation

> # Abstract

Reviewer: I think this should be ## ?

Author: Fixed this one as well as other places with headings shifted a wrong way. Thanks

In order to provide a generic guidance to users, downstream maintainers and
any other consumers of the Cloud Hypervisor project, this document
describes the release process, release cadence, stability expectations and
related topics.

> # Basic Terms

Reviewer: Ditto.

## Stability

In the context of Cloud Hypervisor, the points of reference regarding stability
are as below:

- [REST API](api.md#rest-api).
- [Command line options](api.md#command-line-interface).

> - [Device Model](device_model.md).

Reviewer: This might need reviewing. It's probably out of date.

Author: For this one, did you mean this point is not yet to be included? Otherwise, seems device model might be the subject of a separate PR.

Thanks

- Device tree, device list, ACPI, Hyper-V enlightenments and any other features
  exposed to guest.
- KVM compatibility.

> - UEFI compatibility.

Reviewer: Again, I don't see how that is different to the interface exposed to the guest you mention above. Cloud Hypervisor has nothing to to with UEFI - that is an abstraction provided by a firmware to payload of said firmware.

Author: That's correct. The purpose of mentioning it separately is that UEFI doesn't belong to the CH repo, while it is essential and indeed maintained by the CH org. Besides the services provided to the guest, the firmware itself is to be of a certain layout. Say even if same services were present in a QEMU or any other firmware build, at the CH level it can be already refused (that's the case on Aarch64 for sure, on Intel compatible arch OVMF might be better interchangeable).

I'd then just put this as a single mention into the above list, so then it's clear to be something considered as a stability factor, too.

thanks

Author: Changed that way. Thanks

> - Rust edition compatibility.

Reviewer 3: nit: Better to remove the `.` at the end as these are not complete stances.

Author: ACK, fixed that way, thanks.

> This list might be by far incomplete. Still this document strives to gather any

Reviewer: "This list is incomplete but this document serves as a best effort guide to stability across releases."

Author: Thanks, replaced as suggested.

possible indicators to be desperately considered relevant for the stability context.

## Experimental features

Features that are being actively developed and are possibly incomplete or known to be
unstable are considered experimental. These features are in no case recommended for
use in production.

Features currently considered experimental:

> - TDX.

Reviewer: Lists should either have the punctuation of commas at the end (except for the last with a full stop) or no punctuation at all.

Author: Removed dots. Thanks

- vfio-user.
- vDPA.

## Security

Security issues usually involve only defects directly related to Cloud Hypervisor.

While security issues in the compiler or third party components are out of scope as
they can't be influenced by the Cloud Hypervisor project, still fixes to affected
code or changes to ensure a non vulnerable dependency version is used might trigger
a new point release. However, these measures won't affect possibly already released

> tarballs or binary artifacts.

Reviewer: Not sure what this sentence is trying to say. Surely old releases are vulnerable if they embed a bad dependency.

Author: It says as simple as it sounds - none of released artifacts or tags will be replaced after a release is announced. Instead, there would be a next release fixing the issue. One can wonder and while for many this would be the expected strategy, it was not once i could hear folks would expect things could to be replaced even after some time. Thus, explicitly telling that.

thanks

Reviewer: @weltling I've never heard of an Open Source project retrospectively changing the content of a tag or a released tarball. There is no need to say it.

Reviewer 2: I agree. The only thing we should say here is something along those lines: "Security fixes should be included in a new point release"

Author: I only mentioned "users might be asking", so kinda eliminating questions beforehand, projects wouldn't do it OFC :)

Ok, so i removed this para and put the suggestion from Sebastien instead.

For the CVE part also - yep, so if GH has a mechanism, it would be it at least. Here is probably the only important that one is able to communicate, if a release is security relevant. CVE might be still requested afterwards, just in case.

Thanks

> A new CVE needs to be requested for every security flaw.

Reviewer: This seems unreasonably restrictive. There might be multiple related issues in the same CVE.

Author: Perhaps should rephrase this then. The accent here is meant to be on having a `CVE` whenever a security issue is discovered.

Thanks

Author: Rephrased to include this point, too.

A way to reproduce a security issue might not be made public.

Any downstream projects including or packaging Cloud Hypervisor (for example Linux
distributions) should ideally have a way to be notified on the security issue prior

> the release. Security issuse are to be explicitly mentioned as such in the relase

Reviewer: nit: typo "relase"

Author: Fixed, thanks.

notes including the CVE if available.

# Releases

## Versioning

The versioning scheme uses `MAJOR.POINT` as pattern, this means:

- `MAJOR` can introduce incompatible changes. Changes to the [API](api.md#rest-api),
  [CLI options](api.md#command-line-interface) and [device model](device_model.md)
  require a premonition at least 2 releases in advance for the actual change to take
  place.
- `POINT` can contain bug and security fixes.

## Regular Release Cadence

Cloud Hypervisor is under active development.

> Approximately every 6 weeks a new major release is issued.

Reviewer 3: Nit: should read more balanced with: `A new major release is issued approximately every 6 weeks`.

Author: rephrased as suggested, thanks.

> Point releases are issued on demand, when important bugfixes are in the queue. A

Reviewer 3: Nit: may want to put these contents into one paragraph.

Author: Done that way. Thanks

> regular release would receive bugfixes for the next two cycles (~12 weeks) and then be

Reviewer 3: What is "regular release"? If it refers to "major release", we should stick with using the same word.

Author: ACK, fixed. Thanks

considered EOL.

```
++++ Active release support
E - EOL

        2021                2022                2023 
         |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 
18.0     |    |    |  ++++++++E
19.0     |    |    |    |++++++++E
20.0     |    |    |    |   ++++++++E
21.0     |    |    |    |    | ++++++++E
22.0     |    |    |    |    |    +++++++++E
23.0     |    |    |    |    |    |  +++++++++E

```

> ### Regular Release Stability Considerations

Reviewer 3: Ditto on "regular release".

# Release Documentation

# Abstract

In order to provide a generic guidance to users, downstream maintainers and
any other consumers of the Cloud Hypervisor project, this document
describes the release process, release cadence, stability expectations and
related topics.

# Basic Terms

> ## Stablity 

Reviewer: Little typo.

Author: Fixed, thanks.

In the context of Cloud Hypervisor, the points of reference regarding stability
are as below:

- [REST API](api.md#rest-api).

> - [Internal API](api.md#internal-api) and code compatibility.

Reviewer: I don't think we have ever offered any stability over that.

Author: ACK, removed for now. Probably this hands together with the other about the DSO. Anyway, as long as there's no code exported, no mention needed.

thanks

- [Command line options](api.md#command-line-interface).
- Device tree, device list, ACPI, Hyper-V enlightenments and any other features
  exposed to guest.
- KVM compatibility.
- UEFI compatibility.

This list might be by far incomplete. Still this document strives to gather any
possible indicators to be desperately considered relevant for the stability context.

At the time of writing, Cloud Hypervisor doesn't produce any DSO, thus there's

> nothing other programs can link with.

Reviewer: I don't think this remark is necessary.

Author: Yep, removed.

use in production.

Features currently considered experimental:

- TDX.
- vfio-user.
- vDPA.

## Security

Security issues usually involve only defects directly related to Cloud Hypervisor.

While security issues in the compiler or third party components are out of scope as
they can't be influenced by the Cloud Hypervisor project, still fixes to affected
code or changes to ensure a non vulnerable dependency version is used might trigger
a new point release. However, these measures won't affect possibly already released
tarballs or binary artifacts.

A new CVE needs to be requested for every security flaw.

A way to reproduce a security issue might not be made public.

Any downstream projects including or packaging Cloud Hypervisor (for example Linux
distributions) should ideally have a way to be notified on the security issue prior
the release. Security issuse are to be explicitly mentioned as such in the relase
notes including the CVE if available.

# Releases

## Versioning

The versioning scheme uses `MAJOR.POINT` as pattern, this means:

- `MAJOR` can introduce incompatible changes. Changes to the [API](api.md) require

>   a premonition at least 2 releases in advance for the actual change to take place.

Reviewer: This isn't just the API but everything listed in stability e.g. command line and device model.

Author: ACK, pulled these three into the sentence alltogether.

Thanks

- `POINT` can contain bug and security fixes.

> No additional markers used to denote pre, alpha, beta or other phases.

Reviewer: We might do this in the future so it would be best not to say anything here.

Author: Ok, removed this one as well. Can be added once something starts to be used.

Thanks

## Regular Release Cadence

Cloud Hypervisor is under active development. The regular release schedule is therefore

> quite dynamic and the life time is quite short.

Reviewer: The life time of what is is short?

Author: Oh, of a release it was supposed to mean :)  But i guess it was too relativised. Of course months lifetime is shorter than years, but  an exact statement might be better anyway, so pulling this sentence out as well. 

Thanks

> Approximatly every 6 weeks a new major release is issued.

Reviewer: Typo.

Author: Fixed, thanks.

-----------------------------|---------------------------|--------------------------------------
Feature deprecation          | Can be done               | Cannot be done
Feature add/remove           | Can be done               | Cannot be done
Dependency upgrade           | Can be done               | Possible, security conditions [^1]
Rust compatbility            | Can be changed            | Minumum supported edition version must be kept
KVM compatibility            | Can be changed            | Must be kept
UEFI compatblity             | Can be changed            | Must be kept
API compatibility            | Can be changed [^2]       | Must be kept
Guest OS support             | Can be changed            | Must be kept
Device model                 | Can be changed            | Must be kept
Snapshot/restore support     | Not across versions [^3]  | Not across versions [^3]
Live migration support       | Not across versions [^3]  | Not across versions [^3]
Experimental features        | Can change substantially [^3] | Can change substantially [^3]
Source compatibility         | Should be kept, if possible | Must be kept

> 

Reviewer: I think this table is confusing. I see an LTS release as just a normal major release where we are willing to make point releases for longer. At this point in time I don't want to offer any guarantees between LTS releases. 

And your comment about deprecation/removal is confusing since the LTS release is also a regular release that allows deprecations or removals.

I do like the idea of a table but I think that the two columns should be Major Release & Minor release.

Author: > I think this table is confusing. I see an LTS release as just a normal major release where we are willing to make point releases for longer.  At this point in time I don't want to offer any guarantees between LTS releases.

I didn't have an intention to talk about differences between two LTS. If anything, probaly there's no guarantee at all, as those will have completely different base and be separated in time quite far. 

> And your comment about deprecation/removal is confusing since the LTS release is also a regular release that allows deprecations or removals.
>

Nope, it is actually the understanding I took from the discussion and also how it is done by other projects. If removals of API are possible in LTS, what is the difference between say a latest major release and LTS?

As a simplified version - LTS would usually mean it is frozen and it is only possible to backport non intrusive bug fixes, necessary small dependency upgrades, etc. This doesn't contradict with "it's a normal major release that receives point releases longer", however it is essential what those point releases contain. Say if in `main` a feature is removed, LTS wolud still contain it and any bugs related to that feature would need to be fixed in LTS. If LTS can receive intrusive changes, it would defeat the meaning of the stability it usually is supposed to bring.

Perhaps the LTS part should be left be till the discussion on the LTS issue is complete.
 
> I do like the idea of a table but I think that the two columns should be Major Release & Minor release.

Perhaps there should be two tables - one explaining LTS vs. major, anothe rexplaining major vs. point. Please feel free also to edit this part directly, it should be possible as far as i see.

Thanks

Reviewer: > As a simplified version - LTS would usually mean it is frozen and it is only possible to backport non intrusive bug fixes, necessary small dependency upgrades, etc. This doesn't contradict with "it's a normal major release that receives point releases longer", however it is essential what those point releases contain. Say if in `main` a feature is removed, LTS wolud still contain it and any bugs related to that feature would need to be fixed in LTS. If LTS can receive intrusive changes, it would defeat the meaning of the stability it usually is supposed to bring.

In my view an LTS is just a major release that we will make point releases from for an extended period of time. The same criterion exists for those issues fixed in point releases (critical & security bug fixes). Importantly it would not include any backports of "non intrusive bug fixes" in the general sense.

An LTS would not receive intrusive changes as you say. I think the confusion between us comes as a terminology. I don't consider the point releases from the major declared as the LTS, the LTS releases themselves. They are just point releases so the rules around point releases apply. To me you read the term LTS releases to mean the point releases from the LTS major release.

Hence this is why i'm asserting that the only difference between a non-LTS major release and an LTS one is the length of duration for which point releases may be made. All the usual rules around point releases would still apply.

Author: > > As a simplified version - LTS would usually mean it is frozen and it is only possible to backport non intrusive bug fixes, necessary small dependency upgrades, etc. This doesn't contradict with "it's a normal major release that receives point releases longer", however it is essential what those point releases contain. Say if in `main` a feature is removed, LTS wolud still contain it and any bugs related to that feature would need to be fixed in LTS. If LTS can receive intrusive changes, it would defeat the meaning of the stability it usually is supposed to bring.
> 
> In my view an LTS is just a major release that we will make point releases from for an extended period of time. The same criterion exists for those issues fixed in point releases (critical & security bug fixes). Importantly it would not include any backports of "non intrusive bug fixes" in the general sense.
> 

Gotcha. Yes, this is a good scoping then. This means, that backward incompatible changes can still flow in at maintainers discretion, depending on how critical the bug is.  

> An LTS would not receive intrusive changes as you say. I think the confusion between us comes as a terminology. I don't consider the point releases from the major declared as the LTS, the LTS releases themselves. They are just point releases so the rules around point releases apply. To me you read the term LTS releases to mean the point releases from the LTS major release.
> 

I definitely was intended to depict the diff between `LTS` vs. `non-LTS` only. Perhaps here also the discrepancy that my picture of the stability would be a bit stricter, so then it would make an impression it would be about a point release. On the other hand, a possibility to guarantee that level of stability might not exist.

Perhaps talking in some concrete examples, given there would be this version history (omitting point releases for simplicity):

```
41.0 +++++++++++++++++E
+++ ++++42.0 (LTS)++++++++++++++++++++++++++++E
+++++++++++++43.0+++++++++++++++++++E
+++++++++++++++++++44.0 ++++++++++++++
...........................................................................................................
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ ++++++++++++55.0 (LTS) +++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ +++++++++++++56.0 .....
```

Removing a CLI option, variant 1:
- Deprecate in 41.0 and add a deprecation warning.
- Release 42.0 LTS - there's a deprecation for the whole lifetime.
- Remove deprecated item in 44.0, no more deprecation warning as well.
- Still the option is present in 42 LTS, at this point:
  - Does this mean the feature is legit to be removed in LTS?

Removing a CLI option, variant 2:
- Release 42.0 LTS - there's no deprecation warning, etc.
- Deprecate in 43.0 and add a deprecation warning.
- 42.0 LTS still has no deprecation for it's lifetime.
- Remove deprecated item in 45.0, no more deprecation warning.
- Still the option is present in 42 LTS.
- Some time after, 55.0 LTS doesn't contain this option which is legit.

What would be a suitable approach to handle the described situation from your POV? AFM the variant 2 would provide the cleanest way, still keeping in mind the maintainer's discretion. Perhaps it's too far fetched, just looking to be as concrete as possible.

Thanks

Reviewer: > * Deprecate in 41.0 and add a deprecation warning.
> 
> * Release 42.0 LTS - there's a deprecation for the whole lifetime.
> 
> * Remove deprecated item in 44.0, no more deprecation warning as well.
> 
> * Still the option is present in 42 LTS, at this point:
>   
>   * Does this mean the feature is legit to be removed in LTS?

No. Because again, an LTS is just a major release with point releases for longer. We would never remove functionality in a point release. Again I think it's unhelpful to think of those point releases as the LTS releases instead think of the major release as the LTS release. Whatever functionality is in will stay there for for the whole lifetime.

I would summarise my view as:

"An LTS release is just a major release for which point releases are made for longer following the same rules for what can be backported to a point release."

Author: Thanks for the clarifications! I now reworked this part by removing the table and adding "security considerations" subparagraph to both regular and lts sections. Also removed the mentions of source compat and some others that we've clarified to be not relevant. also, moved the Rust compat to the basic terms list. Regarding the point release, it's otherwise already told at some other place that it's "bug and security", so only mentioning "critical bug and security" in the LTS part. Perhaps there's still more to tell, but this at least gives an impression to the consumer, what to expect. Some corrections would probably be still needed, once the LTS approach has been decided.

Thanks
